# Intermediate - Real analysis

### Elementary level: metric spaces, continuity, differentiation

#### Rudin, *Principles of mathematical analysis*

[MR 52 #5893](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=52+%235893)

The first eight chapters of this little book form the best, cleanest exposition of elementary
real analysis I know of, although few UC readers will have much use for the chapter on
Riemann-Stieltjes integration.  Like Rudin's other books, it is broken into bite-size pieces,
so you can prove every statement in the book on your own if you're self-studying.  If that
isn't enough, there is a large collection of challenging exercises.  Some people think Rudin is
too skinny and streamlined, but I think it's beautiful.  (Ignore chapters 9 and 10, which are a
confusing and insufficiently motivated development of multivariable calculus.  Chapter 11 is
all right for Lebesgue integration, but there are better treatments elsewhere.)

**[Pete Clark]** I agree 100% with what Chris says, but I want to add my voice that this is
(through chapter 8) the cleanest exposition I have ever seen.  I still flip back to this to
check things out.

**[Ben Recht]** I must insist that Chapters 9 and 10 are not THAT bad.  They're worth
revisiting if you are tired of Spivak and do Carmo.

#### Apostol, *Mathematical analysis*

[MR 49 #9123](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=49+%239123)

Covers the same material as Rudin, plus a little complex analysis.  Apostol assumes (hence,
engenders) less maturity on the reader's part, writing most arguments out in "advanced
calculus" detail rather than "real analysis" detail, if that makes sense.  I find it terribly
dry.  Nevertheless the book is careful and comprehensive, with many exercises.

#### Gelbaum/Olmsted, *Counterexamples in analysis*

[MR 30 #204](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=30+%23204)

This little book contains a long list of examples, of strange objects which contradict the
things that you think should be true but aren't.  It starts off at a very elementary level and
gradually builds up to include the Lebesgue theory and R^n.  A good thing to have around on
your first or second trip through analysis.  (See also the authors' *Theorems and
counterexamples in mathematics*
[MR 92b:00003](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=92b%3A00003), an expanded version
covering fields other than analysis.)

#### Pugh, *Real Mathematical Analysis*
[MR3380933](https://mathscinet.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=3380933)

A worthy challenger to baby Rudin. The book does what Rudin is often criticized for: Providing 
excellent motivation. It's a gorgeous, well-written (sometimes even funny) book that provides 
great visual intuition while remaining rigorous and concise. Furthermore, it has plenty of 
wonderful exercises ranging in all levels of difficulty. 

### Intermediate level: normed spaces, Lebesgue integrationK)</H3>

#### Kolmogorov/Fomin, *Introductory real analysis*

[MR 51 #13617](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=51+%2313617)

When I started 207 I couldn't see why the material of this book was analysis: here was set
theory, some linear algebra, some stuff about normed linear spaces, a little functional
analysis... oh, here's that cool integral everyone talks about, but where are the derivatives?
Now I know why it's analysis, of course, but the book as a whole is still a perplexing beast to
the inexperienced.  I think the primary reason it remains a text for 207 is that it costs $13,
so why not?  The style is distinctively Russian, which puts me off but turns other people on.
Extended applications appear occasionally to lend context, but on the whole there is little
motivation (and few exercises).  The book is also difficult to use as a reference work, because
the authors develop only the results they need to get where they're going.

**[Pete Clark]** Agreed.  But it's cheap and though you may wonder why you're learning so much
functional analysis before you see a Lebesgue integral, it's still clear and easy to read, so
there's no reason why you shouldn't own it.

#### Haaser/Sullivan, *Real analysis*

[MR 92a:00006](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=92a%3A00006)

Covers the same material as K/F, with the addition of a chapter relating differentiation to
Lebesgue integration (the fundamental theorems of calculus).  H/S use the Daniell integral
rather than K/F's concrete, bare-hands construction of Lebesgue measure; it's probably good to
do it by hand once, but after that forget it.  The sequence of topics makes a little more sense
than K/F, although the chapter on inner product spaces is lonely at the end, where it lives
because they want to do Fourier series.  But the book is written in a ho-hum style, and the
exercises are too easy.  In this H/S shares the flaw of many books at this level, of making too
big a deal of a little bit of abstraction which might be new to the reader.  I went straight
from little Rudin to big Rudin without much of a stop for either of these books.

#### Hewitt/Stromberg, *Real and abstract analysis*

[MR 51 #3363](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=51+%233363)

This is an old, classic book which is worth a look.  They develop many concrete classical
topics (all those things like Legendre polynomials that you were always curious about) as
exercises.

#### Dieudonné, *Foundations of modern analysis*

[MR 50 #1782](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=50+%231782)

This book is a strange bird, the first volume of a nine(!)-volume treatise by one of the
original Bourbakistes.  I can't really describe it except to say that it's very formalistic, it
has many good exercises, it's very hard to relate to other treatments of the subject, and it
made a big impression on me.

### Graduate level: measure theory, basic functional analysis

#### Rudin, *Real and complex analysis*

[MR 88k:00002](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=88k%3A00002)

The first half is the standard reference for real analysis (the second half is reviewed below).
It's a very clean treatment of the topics it covers, again in bite-size pieces and with many
*challenging* exercises.  Sometimes I get frustrated with the lack of motivation, or with
Rudin's habit of proving exactly the lemmas he needs to do something, without any context for
the results.  Nevertheless it's a good reference or self-study book.  Topics: Integration and
L^p spaces, Banach and Hilbert spaces, Radon-Nikodym theorem and differentiation, Fubini's
theorem, Fourier transforms.

**[Pete Clark]** Yes, how wonderful that there's one book whose first half contains all the
analysis that you'll ever need to know!  This book is advanced and the exposition is austere
("which gives (5).  Applying (3) to (4), we get (6)") but it is absolutely crystalline in its
clarity (exception: is its proof of the L^2 inversion theorem for Fourier transforms valid?
I'm not so sure.)  Isn't this the one math book that every student must buy sooner or later
(aside from Hardy and Wright, of course)?  Some rainy day you'll discover that the book has a
second half and find some very interesting theorems in there, but don't confuse it with a
course on complex analysis, because it's a weird-ass treatment of complex analysis viewed
through the eyes of a conventional analyst.  Think of it as a bonus.

#### Lang, *Real and functional analysis*

[MR 94b:00005](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=94b%3A00005)

Another Serge Lang book, but a Serge Lang book is about the only place you'll find the inverse
function theorem systematically treated for Banach spaces (except Dieudonné, and Lang was a
Bourbakiste too).

#### Royden, *Real analysis*

[MR 90g:00004](http://www.ams.org/mathscinet-getitem?mr=90g%3A00004)

Royden is like Hungerford for me: a lot of people like it, but it annoys me for a number of
semi-silly reasons.  He denotes the empty set by 0 (zero) and the zero element of a vector
space by lowercase theta.  He proves many theorems three times in gradually increasing
generality.  He leaves whole proofs to the exercises, and then depends on them later in the
text.  And I don't like his construction of Lebesgue integration.  (Nyaah, so there.)

**[Ben Recht]** This is such a terrible book!  He leaves the hardest theorems to the reader and
proves some really simple-minded things with too much machinery.  For example, he assigns the
Urysohn lemma for normal spaces as an exercise for the reader and then has to use the Baire
category theorem to show that on Banach spaces, linear operators are continuous iff they
commute with taking limits.  If you have to take 208 or 272, find a supplementary text.  You'll
be happy you did.
